Notes/transcript for presentation.

File: bat-training3.pdf

Slide 1: no notes

Slide 2: In this course we will look at how to configure the Binary Analysis
Tool in detail. For this we first need to look at how BAT works internally.

Slide 3: The Binary Analysis Tool has a few distinct phases. First the binary
is scanned for identifiers that might indicate the start or end of a file
system, compressed file or media file (graphics, audio, video, PDF).

Then each file is inspected to quickly determine a few types, such as finding
if a file is a valid text file, or a valid XML file, and so on, to be able to
quickly filter types and making sure that subsequent scans only get the files
they can actually process.

If the file can be unpacked (file systems, compresed files, media files, etc.)
the file will be unpacked. After that the first three steps will be repeated
for all the unpacked files.

After the files can no not be unpacked any further each file is scanned by file
specific scans. After scanning the files are optionally processed by aggregate
scans. These are scans where it is important that the file is looked at in
context, for example checking if dependencies for dynamically linked ELF files
can be satisfied inside a firmware, or combining scan results from Java class
files that were unpacked from a Java JAR file.

Finally postrun scans are run for each file, and the results are packed into a
result archive.

Slide 4: The identifiers that are searched for are hardcoded in a list in the
source code. The identifiers tell where a file starts or ends. The list can
easily be extended (covered in a next course).

After the identifier search the list of identifiers that were found is passed
to each scan.

Slide 5: The current prerun scans try to determine as quickly as possible what
the type of a file is. The idea is that later scans can ignore files they are
not interested in. For example: a scan to unpack a file system won't work on
a text file or PDF.

Some tags that are currently given are text, binary, xml, graphics, audio, and
elf. Tagging a file only means that a file was positively identified as such,
but the absence of a tag should not be used to draw any conclusions. For
example, UTF-8 files will not be tagged as 'text' since only ASCII files are
tagged as 'text'. Tags are really just an optimisation to avoid unnecessary
scanning later on.

Slide 6: Unpacking scans unpack file systems, compressed files and media files
possibly from a larger file (in case of concatenated data, such as firmwares).
Around 30 file systems, compressed files and media files can currently be
unpacked.

Slide 7: There are quite a few file specific scans, ranging from simple
identifier checks, dynamically linked libraries to more advanced matching
scans.

Slide 8: Aggregate scans look at the files in context and possibly change the
results a bit. More examples apart from the ones mentioned earlier are finding
duplicate files in an archive.

Slide 9: Postrun scans are scans that simply take the results of previous scans
and process them, but don't change the results, but merely have side effects,
such as generating pictures of the results, or making reports.

Slide 10: The Binary Analysis Tool is extremely configurable: each scan, apart
from the identifier search, can be enabled or disabled by simply editing a
configuration file. This configuration file is in a very simple Windows INI
format.

The configuration for scanning is conceptually divided in four main parts
(there are a few other configuration sections which do not apply to scanning):
a main part, plus a configuration part per category. Only the general
configuration part is mandatory.

Slide 11: The main configuration defines things related to for example unpacking
and multiprocessing, database configuration, and debugging. There are many more
options that can tweak specific parts of BAT. All options are described in detail
in the manual.

Slide 12: By default BAT will use all processors that are available.
multiprocessing can be disabled, which might be useful in some situatiions.

The "unpackdirectory" sets the directory where files are unpacked by BAT. By
default this is /tmp, but on some distributions (like Fedora) it is better to
change this, as /tmp is by default on a ramdisk and limited.

The directory "temporary_unpackdirectory" is for specifying a location for
writing temporary data. Some unpack scans and other scans write temporary data
and use a lot of I/O which can take a lot of time (example: LZMA unpacking).
By for example setting this to a ramdisk potentially a lot of time can be saved.

Slide 13: BAT uses a database by default. The PostgreSQL configurations can be
tweaked. If the database runs on the same machine as BAT, then the local socket
can be used instead. For this postgresql_port and postgresql_host need to be
outcommented.

If no database is available (no database server running, etc.) it will
automatically be disabled but it can also be disabled manually by setting
usedatabase to "no".

Slide 14: In case BAT needs to be debugged it can be set either for all of
BAT or for individual phases (note: prerun, unpack and leaf are actually run
in the same phase). Setting debugging will force BAT into single thread mode,
at least for the phase(s) for which debugging is enabled.

Slide 15: The configurations for scans are all slightly similar. Depending on
the type of scan there might be a few differences, but each one has a few
mandatory options: type of the scan, the module where the method that
implements the scan can be found, the method name of the scan and if it is
enabled or disabled.

Slide 16 + 17: There are also a few optional configuration parameters that can
be set by individual scans. Depending on the type it might, or might not, make
sense in the context. The description option can be set for all scans since it
has no influence. The envvars option can also be set for all scans, but it
depends on the scan whether or not it is supported.

The other scan values are specific per context and it depends on the scan type
and the individual scan whether or not it is implemented.

The noscan parameter can be set for all scans, except prerun scans. Files that
are tagged with a value in this list will be automatically ignored for a
particular scan.

The scanonly parameter can be set for the same scans as noscan can be set for.
Only files that are tagged with a value in this list will be scanned by this
particular scan. If this parameter is omitted or an empty list all files will
be considered for scanning. The noscan parameter takes precedence: if a tag
appears in both, then the file will not be scanned.

The magic parameter can be set for prerun scans and unpack scans. Only files
that have an identifier with any of the identifiers in it will be processed by
the scan.

The priority parameter can be set for prerun scans and unpack scans. This is to
avoid false positives: file systems that do not mangle or compress contents
should be scanned first.

The storetarget, storetype and storedir parameters need to be set together if a
postrun scan or aggregate scan creates output (like a report or a picture) that
needs to be stored in the final output. If the results of of a scan should be
cleaned up (for example because it needs to be regenerated next time) then the
cleanup parameter can be set.

The parameter parallel can be used to indicate whether or not files should be
scanned in parallel or not by a scan. Sometimes it makes more sense to scan
files sequentially, for example if there is a side effect in one of the scans
that could effect other scans, like updating a database. If 'parallel' is set
to 'no' then all scans for the category will be scanned in sequence, so for
example setting it to 'no' for gzip unpacking would run all unpack scans
sequentially. The default value for parallel is 'yes'.

Slide 18: no comments

Slide 19: This scan has a low priority, is only run for files where the
identifier for 7z can be found in and ignores files which have already been
classified as something that is not 7z.

Slide 20 + 21: these scans uses a few environment variables (please
note that in the configuration these should be on one line), and ignores quite
a few file types.

Slide 22: After all scans are done BAT writes its output to a tar file. This
file will contain everything: the original file, the unpacked files, the scan
results as Python pickle files, possibly more output files like pictures and
reports.

If enabled it will also output a simplified XML representation of the scan
results.

Slide 21: no comments
