Notes/transcript for presentation.

File: bat-training.pdf

Slide 1: no notes

Slide 2: Welcome to this first course about using the Binary Analysis Tool.
This course is the first in a series of courses about analysing binaries with
the Binary Analysis Tool.

In this first course you will learn about what the Binary Analysis Tool is and
why it was made. You will also learn about the backgrounds of how to identify
compressed files and file systems within a larger binary blob and how to
extract these from the blob.

After that we will look into how the Binary Analysis Tool automates this and
will make your life a lot easier.

Slide 3: Before whe can start you need to make sure you have all he right
materials. You will need to have a (recent) copy of the Binary Analysis Tool
plus dependencies installed. A copy of the Binary Analysis Tool user and
developer guide is highly recommended. Finally, a set of firmwares like the
standard firmwares of this course, plus anything else you would like to scan.

Slide 4: The Binary Analysis Tool, or BAT, is a generic framework for
automating analysis of binary files. It can be used for various purposes, like
license compliance engineering, or security research, or basically any problem
for which you want to analyse a binary file.

The main focus of the authors of the Binary Analysis Tool is on license
compliance engineering.

Slide 5: the Binary Analysis Tool, or in short BAT, was created with a few
goals in mind. The most important goal is to demystify compliance engineering.
To many people compliance engineering is a form of black art, while to a
trained engineer it actually is just another form of debugging.  With the
Binary Analysis Tool it is easier to get up to speed with compliance
engineering.

Very important is that results can be reproduced by someone else who is also
running the tool, without having to solely rely on someone's expert opinion
that is hard to verify.

By making a common language for binary analysis it is easier to talk to other
people about analysing binaries and compare results as well as to accelerate
research in this field.

But, one of the most important reasons behind creating BAT was to take away
excuses for companies that insist that for them it is impossible to find out
what they ship. By giving them a tool that automates this task and reduces it
to a job that can be done in under a few hours they can no longer use this
excuse, but at the same time are not left in the cold, because the tool is
available to them as well and they can use it before they get caught.

In short: it creates a more level playing field.

Slide 6: BAT is released under the Apache 2 license, with some plugins and
extra (external) tools under GPLv2, GPLv2+ or as public domain. It is written
in Python and is a lightweight wrapper around standard and well-tested Linux
tools, or standard tools with some slight tweaks (available in separate
packages). The heavy lifting (unpacking and verifying files) is mostly done by
these tools, while BAT takes care of all the infrastructure, such as setting up
directories, invoking the tools with the correct parameters, cleaning up after
tools, collecting results, pretty printing results, and so on.

In the past few years BAT has actively been used in academic research, of which
results have been merged back into BAT (like an advanced ranking method).

One very important thing to remember is that BAT is just a tool that analyses
binaries, but it does not draw any legal conclusions. The results should always
be interpreted by a human.

Slide 7: In our experience many people starting in license compliance
engineering are jumping to conclusions too quickly, often driven by anger
because someone is *supposedly* ignoring one of the vital reasons that makes
FLOSS work: the license. While completely understandable anger does not fix
issues and only allows you to make mistakes and oversee things, which could
lead to falsely accusing companies of breaching a license.

Compliance engineering should just be used to gather technical evidence of a
possible license violation and answer questions as:

* is program XYZ included in the firmware?
* are there matching sources for XYZ in the source code release, if any?

The rest should be dealt with by legal professionals.

Slide 8: GPL compliance engineering consists of a few steps: first extract
individual files from larger blobs, like firmwares, installers or other files.
This extraction might involve multiple steps, like first extracting a file
system from a firmware, then extracting individual files from the extracted
file system, and so on.

Then the individual files are examined, for example by extracting strings or
function names from the binary and comparing these to publicly available
information like source code.

Another good source is to use circumstantial evidence, like search for
configuration files, or files that are commonly installed together with the
file you are examining.

Slide 9: When looking at a binary file it looks rather overwhelming at first
sight.  On this slide you see what a file looks like if you look at it with the
tool 'hexdump'.  The first column displays the offset in the file (in
hexadecimal notation), the second column has the hexadecimal values of 16 bytes
per row, and the third column displays the bytes as human readable characters,
if possible.

This slide actually displays the first few hundred bytes of a file in ZIP
format. The first bytes ('PK') are (part of) the identifier that is used for
ZIP files.

Slide 10: A binary file, for example a firmware, looks like random data. But
actually there is a hidden structure, that is sometimes easy to find, and
sometimes harder, or almost impossible to find (for example if a firmware has
been encrypted and you don't have any decryption key). In most cases it is
quite trivial, you just need to know what to look for. 

To extract the contents of a firmware you first need to find file systems and
compressed files, then unpack them and for every file that has been extracted
you need to do the same, until you can't unpack anymore. After that you can
start analysing each individual file that you have unpacked.

Slide 11: Analysing a firmware that was downloaded from a website will not
always tell you everything on a device. Often firmware updates only update a
part of the data that you can find on the flash chip. Software like the
bootloader, which often is GPL licensed software, is not included in the
firmware. If a device has a rescue partition it is often also left untouched by
a firmware update.

Sometimes a firmware update might be unusable because it is encrypted and you
don't have the right information to decrypt it. Or, you might not have a
firmware to analyse in the first place!

In these cases you will need to get access to the contents of the flash chip.
The method that's used the most is adding a serial port to the device and
transferring the contents of the flash chip. Other methods could be exploiting
security bugs in the device, or, in case of Android devices using the (remote)
Android debugger. These topics are out of scope for this course.

Slide 12: The firmwares that will be used in this course are all based on
OpenWrt. We will not be using firmwares of commercially available firmwares for
a few reasons: we don't want to single out companies and by distributing their
firmwares we could possibly be infringing the license terms ourselves. By using
OpenWrt, for which we have complete sources, we avoid both issues.

Slide 13: Before we can explain how the Binary Analysis Tool works you need to
understand the workflow that BAT implements, also because it makes it easier to
debug in case BAT does not work correctly and you need to look into files by
hand.

We will therefore look at discovering offsets of compressed files and file
systems and unpacking file systems manually. Compliance engineering for binaries
after unpacking them is the main subject for the next course.

Slide 14: The discover the start of a compressed file or file system there are
two things we can search for in a firmware: known identifiers of compressed
files and file systems and something called `padding'.

Before you can search for these it is essential to have the right tools to
display files.

Slide 15: A tool that easily allows you to view a file in several formats
simultaneously is hexdump. It is intended to display hexadecimal values of the
bytes in a file. When you use the flag '-C' you get the values of the bytes in
both hexadecimal format, plus, if possible, a human readable representation of
those bytes.

A we saw a few slides ago: the first column displays the offset in the file (in
hexadecimal notation), the second column has the hexadecimal values of 16 bytes
per row, and the third column displays the bytes as human readable characters,
if possible.

Slide 16: Many compressed files, file systems or media files start, or end,
with a file specific identifier, such as 'PK' for ZIP files, 'ELF' for ELF
executables or object files or the hexadecimal sequence 0x1f 0x8b 0x08 for gzip
compressed files.

On almost all Linux systems you can find identifiers for many file types in the
so called `magic' file, or database, located in /usr/share/magic.

Slide 17: Another good way to find offsets is to seach for so called `padding
characters' or simply `padding'. On many embedded devices the flash chip is
divided in partitions. The bootloader is configured in such a way that it knows
at which offset it can find for example the (compressed) kernel, or the root
file system.

Data (kernel/file system) is often not enough to fill the entire partition that
is reserved for it, so padding is used to fill out the remaining space. Often
the NUL character (hexadecimal value 0x00) is used, but other values (for
example 0xff) are used as well.

Slide 18: When using hexdump it is quite easy to recognize padding, since
hexdump will not display duplicate lines, but instead replace them with the
asterisk character, If you see a lot of NUL characters it is safe to assume
that it is padding and something interesting is following the padding.

In the example here you can see padding, followed by the identifier for a
SquashFS file system.

Slide 19: No notes

Slide 20: After finding the right offsets for a compressed file or file system
you can carve it from the file. There are several ways you can do this. One way
is to use an editor like Vim or Emacs and edit the file by hand. An easier way
is to use a tool like dd to write the right bytes to a file, for example like
shown on the slide.

Slide 21: No notes

Slide 22: No notes

Slide 23: Extracting files and file systems manually is doable but it is a lot
of work and it is easy to miss things. The Binary Analysis Tool automates the
boring work and searches for identifiers, extracts files and file systems,
unpacks them and verifies unpacking was done successfully. It then recursively
applies the same methods to the unpacked files, so you can unpack nested files
and file systems.

Slide 24: The main program in BAT is a Python script that takes a few
parameters to control the configuration (BAT is highly configurable and
pluggable), the input file and the output file.

Parameters for these three are mandatory and without it the program will exit
with an error message.

Slide 25: The results of a scan of BAT can be viewed with the BAT results
viewer. Later we will dig deeper into fully using and configuring this program.

Running it is fairly straightforward: open the result file from BAT via the
menu and browse.

Slide 26: No notes

Slide 27: In this course you have learned about the backgrounds of the Binary
Analysis Tool, you have learned to identify file systems and compressed files
within a bigger binary blob such as a firmware. You have learned how to extract
file systems and compressed files manually and also to do this automatically
with BAT.

In the next course we will look deeper into per file analysis, both manually
and using BAT.
